My name is Cleo Big Eagle.
I am the director for the Indigenous Initiatives at Library and Archives Canada.
I am Nakoda Oyade from Treaty 4 territory and I originally come from and was born and raised in White Bear First Nation, which is in southern Saskatchewan.
And because of land claims and because of our history,
which is another topic that I could talk about land claims and the history that we come from in that Treaty 4 area.
So we went through land claims and we have some land back.
And so I transferred my band membership over to Ocean Man First Nation.
So there was three communities in southern Saskatchewan with White Bear First Nation and Ocean Man First Nation and Pheasant-Rump First Nation.
So those three communities have gone through land claims processes.
And so now I have family in all those 3 communities, and our family also reaches out to other areas.
The reason I wanted to join in and talk today was about reconciliation.
And so the work that I'm doing over at Library and Archives Canada is because of reconciliation, that was started back in 2015.
So with reconciliation, what I'm finding is that a lot of people misunderstand about reconciliation.
And I think when people talk about reconciliation, there's three big main pieces to reconciliation.
So Calls to Action is actually just one part of the reconciliation process.
And the first part is understanding the Principles of reconciliation and there's 10 of them.
And I would recommend people to go to read read their Principles.
So the Principles works together with the Calls to Action, but also the third part and the third piece is the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
So those are three big areas that all are part of reconciliation.
And sometimes some people I come across, they misunderstand that reconciliation is for Indigenous people to do that work.
And it's for it's everything Indigenous that's for Indigenous people to do that.
And so that is a misunderstanding.
It's for all Canadians and it's for all Canadians, it doesn't matter where you come from across Canada or where you work, it's for all Canadians.
And reconciliation is about reconciling.
And from my point of view, some of the things that we need to reconcile as a Canadian, in our own histories, as a Canadian.
Canadians come to this country from many generations ago or for recent generations, and some of us have always been on this land.
And so when we're reconciling as Canadians, those Canadians that have been in Canada for many generations
and they have gone through our Canadian school system, whether it's elementary, high school, college, university,
all the Canadians that live here, if you know, you've gone to in Canada education system, one of the things that would be under reconciliation
and Senator Murray Sinclair has always talked about, is that education is a really important piece of reconciliation because it's something that has gotten,
I quote, I guess "has gotten into us into this mess, and it's education that is going to get us out of this mess".
So I think education is a really important area for us to look at.
However, I work with federal government and the federal government is not responsible for the education system.
It's more the elementary school and high schools are under provincial jurisdiction, so we don't have any direct authority to change curriculum.
However, I think as a federal government, we can encourage curriculum to be changed.
And that's one of the reasons why I came over to Library and Archives Canada is because of the work that we're doing.
And when we talk about the relationship with the Government of Canada and the Indigenous Peoples of Canada,
where do we find those stories about those very beginning times when that first contact happened between the two groups
and so goes the Government of Canada as their government records that are held at Library and Archives Canada.
So we can go to the archives and bring out information to share, maybe prepare a curriculum for people or information for them to do curriculum.
And so those stories are there.
And those stories is something that it will take a long time for all the stories to come out and to be formed and to be shared.
And I think we've started with a lot of the Indian Residential Schools, the history of the Indian Residential Schools,
also the history of the the Indian Day Schools and most commonly right now,
you hear in the news a lot about the missing children and gravesites and unmarked burials.
So that's an area that we're looking at right now and people are sharing that information.
But there's a lot of other research that's happening in Canada that, you know, a lot of us still aren't aware of.
It's happening in universities.
And and it's happening in other areas about all different types of topics.
So I wanted to share that with you about reconciliation and how we need to reconcile within ourselves
what we were taught in our educational system and same for myself, I'm First Nation
and what I've been taught in my education when I was growing up is different to than what I know now.
And so I think I learn more about some of the things that in university courses and studying and researching history
and also hearing firsthand stories from my family members who had shared those stories and passed down those stories.
Because I think the stories that were shared is about our truth.
And as Indigenous people, First Nations, I know I carry those stories and so the Indian Residential Schools system was not a surprise to me.
The Day Schools was not a surprise to me.
The missing children, unmarked graves, that's not a surprise because I've heard some of those stories growing up.
So with that on reconciliation, I just wanted to share that bit about reconciling mean in your own ways.
Looking back at your what you were taught and staying open to learning new things.
Because sometimes as adults, a lot of us, like I've been to school, I did my time at university, I have my degree, I'm finished with my learning.
I'm not going to go back to learning anymore.
And so I understand, you know, that feeling for some people.
But I think in everyday life, what the teachings I was taught in my culture about learning is a lifelong,
a lifelong endeavor, and we all can learn something new every day for the rest of our lives.
And so I think keeping open to reconciling some of the things that you've heard and some of the things that you were taught in our school system.
So I wanted to share that.
Thank you for listening and have a good day.
And I would say in my language, Ake-wa-cheemna-ginka,wa-shte, thank you.